dev notes for layout transformer (#12396)
microsoft/onnxruntime: onnxruntime/core/optimizer/transpose_optimizer/layout_tranformer_dev_notes.md

# Layout Transformer Dev Notes

## Overview

> ONNX standard assumes NCHW format for tensor layout. However, NCHW is not the best (perf efficient) format for all hardware types. Depending on the underlying hardware, to get the best perf we need to convert the model or in some cases part of the model which will be executed on the hardware from NCHW -> NHWC. Layout Transformer enables just this. It works with ONNX and ORT format models.

Reviewer: 'which will be executed on the hardware' is possibly unnecessary.

> *Note: Currently Layout Transformer works only for compiling EPs like NNAPI, QNN EP etc... More work is needed for it to be compatible with EPs like CPU and CUDA which use static kernel registration.*

Reviewer: FWIW this is largely figured out in https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/pull/11912/

GetCapability is always called twice if the EP asks for NHWC. The first call to GetCapability is purely for layout changes so we're only dealing with ONNX operators that the transpose operator knows about. The second call does things like convert a QDQ node group to a supported quantized op, or fusions such as Conv+activation. 

It's a little obtuse as to what should be done in the first call to GetCapability vs. the second, so ideally we can refine that a bit.

Author: I added more clarification around GetCapability based on behavior on master branch.

```
Foreach
  1. call GetCapability
  2. IF EP.DesiredFormat == NHWC
    2.1. Invoke Layout Transformer
    2.2 If graph is modified -> call GetCapability (layout transformer can add new nodes to the graph)
  3 Compile
```

Layout Transformer does multiple top to bottom passes on the graph in order to produce the most efficient graph with as little transpose ops as possible.

*IMPORTANT NOTE* After layout transformation is done, graph resolve cannot be called for the graph. This is because graph resolve validates the shape of the nodes by calling ONNX TypeAndShapeInferenceFunction, these type and shape inf functions can ONLY infer shapes for NCHW format values. Therefore, when passed a graph with NHWC nodes the inferred shape validation fails and hence graph resolve throws. This is the very reason layout transformation is *NOT ENABLED* when Graph Partitioner Mode is kAssignOnly.

### Convert layout for applicable nodes

> [This is the first pass](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/1a4868e5c4c4a270ad91036e36f2a03410c4c278/onnxruntime/core/optimizer/transpose_optimizer/optimizer_api_impl.cc#L815). Layout transformer simply inserts transpose nodes before and after every layout sensitive ops that are claimed by the EP. After this pass, the graph is correct but extremely inefficient.

Reviewer: Might help to be more explicit and say it inserts an NCHW->NHWC Transpose before the node and an NHWC->NCHW Transpose after the node.

3. This is the final optimization pass. In this pass, any transpose node (not part of a QDQ group) if succeeds a DQ node, is moved above the DQ node. In QDQ models this helps to preserve the QDQ node group when a Transpose was pushed across a DQ into an existing QDQ node group. In all other scenarios this is beneficial as well because moving transpose above DQ node is more efficient as transpose node now handles less data. [Code](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/1a4868e5c4c4a270ad91036e36f2a03410c4c278/onnxruntime/core/optimizer/transpose_optimizer/transpose_optimizer.cc#L1956)

## Enabling layout transformer for a new Compile based EP
For details please refer to [PR 10371](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/pull/10371) which introduced layout transformer and enabled it for NNAPI.

Basic steps are as follows:
1. Implement [GetPreferredLayout](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/1a4868e5c4c4a270ad91036e36f2a03410c4c278/include/onnxruntime/core/framework/execution_provider.h#L285) method for the EP which overrides the base class method.
2. Remove any existing logic in the EP to convert layouts

> 3. Add a validation method similar to [IsOpInRequiredLayout](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/1a4868e5c4c4a270ad91036e36f2a03410c4c278/onnxruntime/core/providers/nnapi/nnapi_builtin/builders/op_builder.cc#L502) to validate the ops are in required layout.

Reviewer: Maybe mention that this only applies to layout sensitive ops, and the validation is a check that the domain kMSInternalNHWCDomain

## Overview
ONNX standard assumes NCHW format for tensor layout. However, NCHW is not the best (perf efficient) format for all hardware types. Depending on the underlying hardware, to get the best perf we need to convert the model or in some cases part of the model from NCHW -> NHWC. Layout Transformer enables just this. It works with ONNX and ORT format models.

*Note: Currently Layout Transformer works only for compiling EPs like NNAPI, QNN EP etc... More work is needed for it to be compatible with EPs like CPU and CUDA which use static kernel registration.*

## How it works
Layout transformer is [invoked during graph partitioning](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/1a4868e5c4c4a270ad91036e36f2a03410c4c278/onnxruntime/core/framework/graph_partitioner.cc#L111) phase. After getting capabilities from the registered EP, layout transformer converts the part of the graph which is claimed by the EP to NHWC IF this is the desired format for the given EP.

```
Foreach
  1. call GetCapability
  2. IF EP.DesiredFormat == NHWC
    2.1. Invoke Layout Transformer
    2.2 If graph is modified -> call GetCapability (layout transformer can add new nodes to the graph)
  3 Compile
```

> GetCapability returns a bunch of IndexedSubGraphs that the given execution provider can run. During layout transformation, new nodes (Transpose, Gather etc) can be added within these subgraph. Therefore, calling GetCapability for the second time ensures that the EP can claim these new nodes as well and fuse the entire sub graphs. This is important for perf. Without this the execution will unnecessary switch to a fallback EP (in most cases CPU EP).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GetCapability returns a collection of IndexedSubGraphs that the given execution provider can run. During layout transformation, new nodes (Transpose, Gather etc) can be added within these subgraphs. Therefore, calling GetCapability for the second time ensures that the EP can claim these new nodes as well as fuse subgraphs. This is important for perf. Without this the execution will unnecessarily switch to a fallback EP (in most cases CPU EP).
```

> *IMPORTANT NOTE* After layout transformation is done, graph resolve cannot be called for the graph. This is because graph resolve validates the shape of the nodes by calling ONNX TypeAndShapeInferenceFunction, these type and shape inf functions can ONLY infer shapes for NCHW format inputs. Therefore, when passed a graph with NHWC nodes the inferred shape validation fails and hence graph resolve throws. This is the very reason layout transformation is *NOT ENABLED* when Graph Partitioner Mode is kAssignOnly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*IMPORTANT NOTE* After layout transformation is done, Graph::Resolve cannot be called for the graph. This is because graph resolve validates the shape of the nodes by calling ONNX TypeAndShapeInferenceFunction, these type and shape inferencing functions can ONLY infer shapes for NCHW format inputs. Therefore, when passed a graph with NHWC nodes the inferred shape validation fails and hence graph resolve throws. This is the very reason layout transformation is *NOT ENABLED* when Graph Partitioner Mode is kAssignOnly.
```

Reviewer: Double checking why Graph::Resolve fail. I would have expected the new nodes may not have an Op() given they're in the internal domain and an EP won't necessarily have a static kernel for the operator so you'd potentially hit a nullptr vs. the ONNX type/shape inferencing failing (which I'd expect to only apply to nodes in the ONNX domain).

Author: Updated this paragraph. Please re-review and let me know if it makes sense now.

Layout Transformer does multiple top to bottom passes on the graph in order to produce the most efficient graph with as little transpose ops as possible.

### Convert layout for applicable nodes
[This is the first pass](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/1a4868e5c4c4a270ad91036e36f2a03410c4c278/onnxruntime/core/optimizer/transpose_optimizer/optimizer_api_impl.cc#L815). Layout transformer simply inserts NCHW -> NHWC transpose node before and NHWC -> NCHW transpose node after every layout sensitive op that is claimed by the EP. After this pass, the graph is correct but extremely inefficient.

### Optimize the converted graph
After the first pass is complete, layout transformer calls the transpose optimizer to remove all the canceling as well as redundant transposes from the graph. The following passes happen as part of transpose optimization.

> 1. Iterate over sorted nodes in reverse order to find which outputs have paths through supported ops to  transpose nodes. Transposes are pulled pushed towards these outputs. Graph is not altered in this pass. [Code](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/1a4868e5c4c4a270ad91036e36f2a03410c4c278/onnxruntime/core/optimizer/transpose_optimizer/transpose_optimizer.cc#L1875)

Reviewer 2: - "Transposes are" -> "Transposes will be"
- "pulled pushed"?

Basic steps are as follows:
1. Implement [GetPreferredLayout](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/1a4868e5c4c4a270ad91036e36f2a03410c4c278/include/onnxruntime/core/framework/execution_provider.h#L285) method for the EP which overrides the base class method.
2. Remove any existing logic in the EP to convert layouts
3. Add a validation method similar to [IsOpInRequiredLayout](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/1a4868e5c4c4a270ad91036e36f2a03410c4c278/onnxruntime/core/providers/nnapi/nnapi_builtin/builders/op_builder.cc#L502) to validate that the layout sensitive op's domain matches "kMSInternalNHWCDomain". Layout Transformer updates the domain for layout sensitive ops to "kMSInternalNHWCDomain" after the conversion to NHWC format.
4. Add tests. The testing framework already includes [InternalTestingExecutionProvider](https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/blob/1a4868e5c4c4a270ad91036e36f2a03410c4c278/onnxruntime/test/providers/internal_testing/internal_testing_execution_provider.h#L11) which can be leveraged for such tests.

## Making Updates to Transformer and Testing

> Apart from bug fixes, updates to layout sensitive op schema as well as addition of new layout sensitive ops will require changes in layout transformer as well as transpose optimizer.

Reviewer 2: can we define what a "layout sensitive op" is?
